---
layout: post
title: Letter to 10 year old self
comments: true
tags: [letter-to-self, life, motivation]
---

_Dear Francesco, _ _It’s me, 25 years in the future._ _Can you please stop
typing on that keyboard and listen? __Let me give you some advice about your
life._ _I know, it’s annoying to let people think you are a weirdo just
because you don’t play the way “regular” kids do. But don’t let that stress
you. Things will fall into place at some point, believe me. After all, I am
writing to you from a keyboard that makes exactly the same sound of yours.
That’s not to say that keyboards haven’t changed though._ _You know how
excited you get whenever you see a computer and you open things to look at how
they are made inside, and sometimes, when you try to build them back you get
some spare pieces in your hands you don’t know where they belong to, and your
mum goes crazy? __ __Keep doing that! That’s your curiosity at work. Keep
breaking things, keep exploring, keep being curious towards all the things
around you. One day you will have no pieces left in your hands and you will
finally build it back, fully functional. Whatever it is. __ __However,
remember that your life is not only about putting pieces together. Don’t
forget that there are people around you, your friends, your family, and there
will be more later on. They all love you, in their own way. Never think they
don’t._ _I don’t have to tell you to study. I think that you study too much
for a kid of your age. __ __Slow down! You have your entire life for reading
and studying the most fascinating things you could ever imagine. Now, it’s
time to play. Play more. You don’t play enough, kid._ _Sport is good but don’t
just run alone on the track and field for hours, under the sun, every day. I
know that you want to break that record and beat Andrea. You will, in some
years. And you will smash a number of records in athletics. But even then,
remember that being the best is not the only reason to live. Having fun is.
Have fun, Francesco! One day you will realize that if there is no fun in the
things you do, they will eventually become your enemy. _ _Learn other sports.
Learn how to play football, so you will stop kicking the legs of your friends,
and kick the ball more. Learn how to play tennis, or another sport where you
have to interact with someone else. You will learn more from people by playing
with them. _ _Put time in the things that make you smile, surround yourself
with people who don’t make you feel lonely, those who inspire you, and also
those who don’t. Because they will teach you that life can also be flat
sometimes. That’s what will make you aware of the good and the bad. _ _Now
stop typing that GW-BASIC program to make a calculator, and go out! __It’s a
beautiful day._ 

_Good luck_ _Francesco_

